Research Abstract:

As exotic plant species can have negative, neutral, or positive impacts on the resident communities they invade, understanding what is driving this variation is essential to predicting and controlling their impacts. One long-standing hypothesis often used to help explain this variation is the competition-relatedness hypothesis. As it applies to invasion ecology, the competition-relatedness hypothesis predicts that exotic species that share more evolutionary history (i.e. are more phylogenetically related) with neighbours in their invaded communities compete more strongly with them. As empirical support for this hypothesis is mixed, this study investigates whether additional insight from the exotic species’ native ranges may be the key to understanding these complex interactions. Experiments conducted using four exotic annual plant species from an invaded community in southwestern Australia, with a focus on coarse phylogenetic relatedness as a proxy for shared deep evolutionary history, revealed that phylogenetic relatedness had generally weak effects on fitness outcomes in the invaded community. Other factors such as neighbour density and native/exotic status appeared to be potentially more important for these exotic species. In incorporating information from the native range, phylogenetic relatedness of exotics to neighbours in their native communities was neither similar to phylogenetic relatedness to neighbours in the invaded community, nor was it associated with their fitness outcomes, with the exception of one exotic species. As available data were limited in this study, further research is needed to better understand how we can use information from the native range to predict exotic species impacts. 
